To whom it may concern,

We are submitting our manuscript, ”Inferring generation-interval distributions from contact-tracing data”, for consideration for publication in Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 

Estimating the reproductive number (i.e., the average number of secondary cases caused by a primary case) is crucial in controlling the spread of disease. However, directly measuring the reproductive number requires detailed knowledge of disease history and is often difficult. Instead, the reproductive number can be estimated from the exponential growth rate of an epidemic using generation-interval distributions.

A generation interval is a time between when an individual is infected and when that individual infects another person. It is a key epidemiological quantity that defines the time scale of an epidemic and, therefore, provides a link between the speed (growth rate) and the strength (reproductive number) of an epidemic. This link has been widely utilized in outbreak analyses because generation intervals and exponential growth rates are easy to measure. In particular, generation intervals can be measured through contact tracing, by identifying who infected whom.

Our study asks how generation intervals, measured through contact tracing, vary temporally and spatially. Several studies have already characterized the difference between the forward measurement (looking at infectees) and the backward measurement (looking at infectors) of generation intervals over time, but have assumed that (1) generation intervals are measured from one cohort of infected individuals and (2) population mixes homogeneously. In practice, contact tracing is performed over the course of an epidemic, which spreads through complex contact structure, by aggregating available information. Therefore, we expect the observed generation intervals to contain information about the underlying population structure. We develop theory and use individual-based simulations on a network to show that accounting for censoring bias arising from contact tracing provides a spatially informed generation-interval distribution, which correctly links the speed and strength of an epidemic.

Our study contributes to the field by providing an intuitive understanding of the role of generation-interval distributions in characterizing an epidemic. Linking population structure and generation intervals is particularly important because contact structures are often difficult to estimate during an ongoing epidemic. The ideas and perspectives in this article will help disease modelers and policy-makers navigate difficult questions around predicting and controlling infectious diseases.

Sincerely,

Sang Woo Park, David Champredon, and Jonathan Dushoff
